---
title: Welcome to Svelte!
subtitle: Svelte files, Reactivity, and the DOM
objectives:
  - 'Introduction to Svelte components, including the structure of a Svelte file.'
  - 'Reactive declarations, assignments, and the reactivity model, explaining how Svelte updates the DOM in response to state changes.'
  - 'Data binding in templates using {} for TypeScript expressions.'
published: false
prev: 'preamble'
next: '02'
---

<script context="module">
    import BoundVariables from '$lib/components/examples/BoundVariables.svelte';
    import Count from '$lib/components/examples/Count.svelte';
    import Hello from '$lib/components/examples/Hello.svelte';
    export { BoundVariables, Count, Hello };
</script>

## What is Svelte?

Svelte is a modern, compiled TypeScript framework that focuses on shifting operations to compile time, resulting in highly efficient and lightweight code. It offers a reactive approach to building user interfaces, where changes to the data automatically update the DOM. With its simplicity and performance focus, Svelte enables developers to create fast, elegant web applications with minimal boilerplate code.

## Anatomy of a Svelte file

Svelte files will always end in `.svelte` and start with the `script` tag, followed by the `html` content, followed by the `style` css. Each of these sections is optional, including the HTML.

### HTML

In Svelte, the HTML is written almost as you would in a regular HTML file, but with enhanced capabilities due to Svelte's templating syntax. This includes:

    - Directives: These are special attributes prefixed by let, on, bind, class, and more, that allow for dynamic behaviors directly within the HTML.
    - Blocks: Svelte provides special syntax for reactive updates, conditionals, loops, and more, such as `{#if}`, `{#each}`, and `{#await}`.
    - Interpolation: Curly braces `{}` are used to embed TypeScript expressions within the HTML, which are reactively updated whenever the underlying data changes.

### TypeScript

The `<script>` tag in a Svelte component is where you define the component's reactive state, computed properties, functions, module context, and more. Svelte enhances standard TypeScript with a few additional features:

    - Reactive Declarations: Variables can be made reactive by prefixing - expressions with $:. Svelte will automatically update the DOM when these reactive variables change.
    - Component Logic: Functions and event handlers are defined here, managing everything from component initialization to handling user interactions.
    - Props and Context: Components can accept props from parents, and context can be used to pass data deeply.

### CSS

CSS in a Svelte component is scoped by default, meaning styles defined in a component only apply to that component. This is achieved without the use of shadow DOM but rather by appending unique identifiers to CSS selectors at build time. This prevents styles from leaking out and affecting other parts of the application unintentionally.

#### Example of a Svelte Component Integration

Here’s a simple example to illustrate how HTML, CSS, and TypeScript are integrated within a single Svelte component:

```svelte
<script lang="ts">
	let name = 'World';
	function greet() {
		alert(`Hello, ${name}!`);
	}
</script>

<p>Hello, {name}!</p>
<button on:click={greet}> Greet </button>

<style>
	button {
		background-color: blue;
		color: white;
		padding: 8px 15px;
		border: none;
		border-radius: 5px;
	}
</style>
```

<svelte:component this={Count} />

In this example, the TypeScript defines a reactive variable and a function, the CSS scopes styles to the button within this component, and the HTML uses Svelte’s templating syntax to bind the greet function to the button’s click event and dynamically display the name.

This integration allows developers to manage a component's logic, styling, and structure in a cohesive and encapsulated manner, promoting maintainability and reusability in web development projects.

## Reactivity in Svelte

Svelte achieves reactivity through a compilation step that converts your declarative components into efficient imperative code that updates the DOM. Reactivity is primarily driven by assignments. When you assign a new value to a variable, Svelte's compiled code will automatically update the DOM wherever this variable is used. Thus in many cases reactivity is as easy as updating a variable.

```svelte
<script>
	let count = 0;

	function increment() {
		count += 1; // This assignment triggers the UI to update
	}

	// Reactive declaration
	$: squared = count * 2;
</script>

<button on:click={increment}>Click me</button><p>Count: {count}</p><p>Squared: {squared}</p>
```

<svelte:component this={Count} />

Svelte also allows for reactive declarations, which are more powerful. You can use the `$:` label to mark a statement as reactive. This means that whenever the values within that statement change, the statement re-executes. Reactive declarations are useful for deriving values from state, which is what we do above.

When a reactive variable updates, Svelte generates the minimal amount of DOM updates required. It does this by statically analyzing the component code at compile time, determining exactly what DOM manipulations are needed when state changes. Unlike Virtual DOM-based frameworks that require diffing to determine changes, Svelte’s approach eliminates this overhead. This results in faster updates and less memory consumption. Svelte’s reactivity is based on assignments, so if you mutate an object or array (like pushing to an array or changing a property of an object) without reassigning it, Svelte won’t automatically pick up the changes. You need to explicitly indicate that a reassignment has occurred, by reassigning the variable. We'll see this concept again when we look at how Svelte Stores work.

## Further into Templating

In Svelte, `{}` are used to insert JavaScript or TypeScript expressions directly into the HTML. We saw this in action above when we displayed the `count` variable in the `p` tag. This is often referred to as interpolation. When the variables in these expressions change, Svelte automatically updates the DOM to reflect the new values.

Svelte also supports two-way data binding using the `bind:` directive. This is particularly useful for form elements like input, textarea, and select.

```svelte
<script lang="ts">
	import TextInput from '$lib/components/examples/TextArea.svelte';
	import Division from '../Division.svelte';

	let changeEvents = 0;

	let value = 'Adrian Newey set to leave Red Bull Racing at the start of 2025.';
</script>

<h4>These text areas are bound together, unlike Adrian Newey and Red Bull Racing!</h4>

<TextInput placeholder="This is useless" bind:value on:change={() => (changeEvents += 1)} />

<TextInput placeholder="This is also useless" bind:value on:change={() => (changeEvents += 1)} />
```

<svelte:component this={BoundVariables} />
