---
title: 'Data in Svelte!'
subtitle: Props, data binding, and stores
objectives:
  - Passing data to child components.
  - Two-way data binding in Svelte.
  - Introduction to Svelte stores for state management and their types (writable, readable, derived).
published: true
prev: '01e'
next: '02e'
---

<script context="module">
    import TwoWayBinding from '$lib/components/examples/TwoWayBinding.svelte';

    export { TwoWayBinding };
</script>

## Props

In Svelte, passing data to child components is straightforward and intuitive, utilizing a common mechanism known as "props" (properties). Props are how data flows down from parent components to child components, allowing for a modular and maintainable code structure. If the parent component does not pass a prop, and the prop has a default value in the child component, the default value is used. Props can be any type supported by TypeScript, including functions.

In Svelte, any variable that is exported in a child component can be used as a prop. This means that when you instantiate a child component in a parent component, you can pass data to these exported variables. These variables correspond to arrtibutes of the same name on the child component.

```svelte
<script>
	export let message = 'Default message'; // `message` is a prop
</script>

<p>{message}</p>
```

Also of note, props will be updated reactively when the parent state changes by default.

## Data binding...again

Two-way data binding in Svelte is a powerful feature that automatically synchronizes the state between the UI and the application's state. This means that changes in the UI input will immediately update the corresponding data in the application's state, and vice versa, any changes to the application's data will be reflected in the UI. Svelte achieves this using the `bind:` directive.

```svelte
<script>
	let name = ''; // State variable
</script>

<input type="text" bind:value={name} placeholder="Enter your name" />
<!-- `value` of the input is bound to the `name` variable -->
<p>Hello, {name}!</p>
<!-- Any changes in the input will automatically update here and vice versa -->
```

<svelte:component this={TwoWayBinding} />

### Common Use Cases for Two-Way Binding

- Forms: Two-way data binding is especially useful in forms where you need to gather inputs from users and submit them. It simplifies the process of collecting and validating user input.

- UI Controls: For dynamic UI controls like sliders or switch toggles, two-way data binding helps in keeping the UI state and the data model in sync effortlessly.

Although two-way data binding is convenient, it's important to ensure that inputs do not become uncontrollable. It's often good practice to validate or process data before updating the state. For large applications with complex data structures or a large number of bindings, consider the implications of too much reactivity, as every change triggers updates. In such cases, it might be beneficial to manage updates more granularly.

## Svelte Stores

Svelte stores are a built-in state management solution in Svelte, designed to manage global state across components in a Svelte application on the _client-side_. They provide a simple and effective way to share reactive data between components, even those that are not directly related. Svelte offers several types of stores, including writable, readable, and derived stores, each serving different use cases.

### 1. Writable Stores

A writable store is the most common type of store used in Svelte for holding and managing state that can be read and updated from multiple components.

#### Creating a Writable Store

To create a writable store, you use the `writable` function from the `svelte/store` module. You can provide an initial value to this store.

```typescript
import { writable } from 'svelte/store';

const count = writable(0); // Initial value is 0
```

#### Using a Writable Store

To use the store in components, you subscribe to it using the `$` syntax, which makes it reactive. You can read and update the store's value as needed. Note that you can also access Svelte stores outside of Svelte components via the `get`, `set`, etc methods available via `svelte/store`.

```svelte
<script>
	import { count } from './store.js';

	function increment() {
		count.update((n) => n + 1);
	}
</script>

<button on:click={increment}>Increment</button><p>Count: {$count}</p>
```

### 2. Readable Stores

Readable stores are used when you want to provide a read-only view of some data. The store’s value can be updated internally but not directly from outside components.

#### Creating a Readable Store

You create a readable store using the `readable` function, and you must provide an initial value and a start function that defines how the store’s value is set or updated.

```typescript
import { readable } from 'svelte/store';

const time = readable(new Date(), function start(set) {
	const interval = setInterval(() => {
		set(new Date());
	}, 1000);

	return function stop() {
		clearInterval(interval);
	};
});
```

#### Using a Readable Store

You subscribe to a readable store just like a writable store, but you cannot directly update its value.

```svelte
<script>
	import { time } from './store.js';
</script>

<p>Current time: {$time.toTimeString()}</p>
```

### 3. Derived Stores

Derived stores are a powerful feature in Svelte that lets you derive new stores from one or more existing stores. Whenever the original store’s value changes, the derived store’s value is automatically updated based on a specified function.

#### Creating a Derived Store

You create a derived store using the `derived` function. This function can take multiple stores and a function that returns the derived value.

```typescript
import { derived } from 'svelte/store';
import { count } from './store.js';

const doubled = derived(count, ($count) => $count * 2);
```

#### Using a Derived Store

Use it like any other store:

```svelte
<script>
	import { doubled } from './store.js';
</script>

<p>Double count: {$doubled}</p>
```
