---
title: Stores!
subtitle: Basic and Advanced
objectives:
  - Introduction to Svelte stores for state management.
  - Custom stores and their types (writable, readable, derived).
published: true
prev: '02e'
next: '03e'
---

## Svelte Stores

Svelte stores are a built-in state management solution in Svelte, designed to manage global state across components in a Svelte application on the _client-side_...usually (see below). They provide a simple and effective way to share reactive data between components, even those that are not directly related. This is the key contrast from Svelte's `Context API` - there is no required component hierarchy for stores to function. Svelte offers several types of stores, including writable, readable, and derived stores, each serving different use cases.

Stores may be accessed (subscribed to) with the `$storeName` syntax in Svelte files. To borrow a tidbit from the official docs:

> Keep in mind that you don't have to use these functions to enjoy the reactive $store syntax in your components. Any object that correctly implements .subscribe, unsubscribe, and (optionally) .set is a valid store, and will work both with the special syntax, and with Svelte's built-in derived stores.

### Sveltekit Stores

In SvelteKit, several reactive stores are provided to help manage application state in response to changes in the environment or user navigation. These include page, navigation, and updated stores, which are especially useful for handling routing dynamics and state across the lifecycle of pages. Sveltekit's app stores use the Context API to enable their usage server-side - that's fully explained here in the [Sveltekit documentation](https://kit.svelte.dev/docs/state-management#using-stores-with-context) - so they aren't restricted to the browser.

#### page Store

The page store contains objects that describe the current page and is probably the store that is used most often. It includes:

    url — the URL of the current page
    params — the current page's parameters
    route — an object with an id property representing the current route
    status — the HTTP status code of the current page
    error — the error object of the current page, if any (you'll learn more about error handling in later exercises)
    data — the data for the current page, combining the return values of all load functions
    form — the data returned from a form action

This store is extremely useful for accessing route parameters and query strings, making it easier to fetch data based on the current route.

#### navigating Store

The navigation store is used to access the state of navigation. It provides an object that represents the ongoing navigation process when the page is transitioning from one route to another. This can be handy for showing loading indicators or managing components that should react to changes in route transitions. This store includes:

    from and to — objects with params, route and url properties
    type — the type of navigation, e.g. link, popstate or goto

#### updated Store

The updated store in SvelteKit is less commonly discussed but can be used to handle cases where the page's content needs to be revalidated after navigation or other updates. This store can trigger reactivity when new data needs to be fetched or when the page needs to respond to changes after the initial load. Further on the updated store can be found [here](https://learn.svelte.dev/tutorial/updated-store).

More on all of the Sveltekit app stores can be found in the [Sveltekit documentation](https://kit.svelte.dev/docs/modules#$app-stores).

## Custom Stores

First, let's review the types of stores provided by the store api:

### Writable Stores

A writable store is the most common type of store used in Svelte for holding and managing state that can be read and updated from multiple components.

#### Creating a Writable Store

To create a writable store, you use the `writable` function from the `svelte/store` module. You can provide an initial value to this store.

```typescript
import { writable } from 'svelte/store';

const count = writable(0); // Initial value is 0
```

#### Using a Writable Store

You can read and update the store's value as needed with the `$` syntax. Note that you can also access Svelte stores outside of Svelte components via the `get`, `set`, etc methods available via `svelte/store`.

```svelte
<script>
	import { count } from './store.js';

	function increment() {
		count.update((n) => n + 1);
	}
</script>

<button on:click={increment}>Increment</button><p>Count: {$count}</p>
```

### 2. Readable Stores

Readable stores are used when you want to provide a read-only view of some data. The store’s value can be updated internally but not directly from outside components.

#### Creating a Readable Store

You create a readable store using the `readable` function, and you must provide an initial value and a start function that defines how the store’s value is set or updated.

```typescript
import { readable } from 'svelte/store';

const time = readable(new Date(), function start(set) {
	const interval = setInterval(() => {
		set(new Date());
	}, 1000);

	return function stop() {
		clearInterval(interval);
	};
});
```

#### Using a Readable Store

You subscribe to a readable store just like a writable store, but you cannot directly update its value.

```svelte
<script>
	import { time } from './store.js';
</script>

<p>Current time: {$time.toTimeString()}</p>
```

### 3. Derived Stores

Derived stores are a powerful feature in Svelte that lets you derive new stores from one or more existing stores. Whenever the original store’s value changes, the derived store’s value is automatically updated based on a specified function.

#### Creating a Derived Store

You create a derived store using the `derived` function. This function can take multiple stores and a function that returns the derived value.

```typescript
import { derived } from 'svelte/store';
import { count } from './store.js';

const doubled = derived(count, ($count) => $count * 2);
```

#### Using a Derived Store

Use it like any other store:

```svelte
<script>
	import { doubled } from './store.js';
</script>

<p>Double count: {$doubled}</p>
```
