---
title: Exercise 3!
subtitle: The last one if you don't count the last one!
objectives:
  - A review of some existing uses.
  - Implementing a custom Svelte store.
published: true
prev: '03'
next: '04'
---

## Review

As promised back in Exercise 1, let's look back at the `page` store that we used:

```svelte
<script>
  ...
	const code = $page.status;
	const message = $page.error?.message;
  ...
</script>
```

This now probably seems pretty self explanatory - we are subscribing to the store with the `$` syntax and pulling the value. Let's apply this to a custom store!

## New Stores!

We're now done with our Formula 1 standings app, because [Max Verstappen](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q9Bv0B-wJ5s) will probably win WDC anyway.

Let's look at a common frontend exercise...implementing a Formula 1 themed Wordle clone!

If we take a gander in `src/routes/(everything_else)/exercise/wordle/+page.svelte` we'll see that we already have components being pulled in:

```svelte
<script>
	import GameContainer from './components/GameContainer.svelte';
	import Header from './components/Header.svelte';
</script>

<Header />

<GameContainer />
```

So let's try [navigating there](/exercise/wordle) in our development environment. Looks like it sort of works? We can type and guess, but our keyboard isn't updating for the outcomes.

It seems like we need to add a way to track the outcomes of these guesses...let's add a store inside the `stores.ts` file (src/routes/(everything_else)/exercise/wordle/components/stores.ts).

Guess outcomes (whether the letter was correctly placed, transposed in the wrong location, or totally wrong) is treated like so:

- 0 = correct
- 1 = transposed
- 2 = wrong

and actually already encapsulated in the `GuessedLetter` class within the stores file. We should implement a store that leverages this to persist the state of guesses.

To save you from having to search wildly around the repo for where to add this:

- The `Key` component holds the individual state for a given letter, and is probably where you want to decide how to color it on the keyboard.  
- The `Grid` component processes guesses and handles the outcomes in `handleGuess`.

If this is all implemented correctly, we should now have colored letters!

### Let's go to the next lesson!
